# THG: The most comprehensive general construction of human metabolism to date

A protocol for the automatic construction of highly curated genome-scale models of human metabolism.

The protocol enables the automatic curation and/or expansion of existing human GEMs or generates a highly curated metabolic network based on the current information retrieved from multiple databases in real time. 

Please cite https://github.com/biosustain/THG if you use THG in your research. 

## User guide 

User guide and protocol description can be found below and in the respective folders.


## Model Overview


| Model | Developed from | Reactions | Metabolites | Genes | GPRs | Compartments |
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- |------------- | ------------- |------------- | ------------- |
| Network Model | Online databases | 2.930 | 3.849| 1.4.85 | 2.838 | 9 |
| Human1&ast; | HMR2, Recon3D, iHsa  | 13.069 | 8.369| 3.067 | 8.022 | 9 |
| THG-beta1 | Human1&ast;  | 13.069 | 8.369| 3.067 | 8.022 | 9 |
| THG-beta2 | Human1&ast;  | 18.136 | 12.919 | 3.174 | 13.188 | 9 |
| THG | Network Model, THG-beta2   | 20.677 | 13.840 | 3.392 | 15.651 | 9 |

&ast; J. L. Robinson, P. Kocabas, H. Wang, P.-E. Cholley, et al. An atlas of human metabolism. Sci. Signal. 13, eaaz1482 (2020). doi:10.1126/scisignal.aaz1482

The metabolic network model was generated by the generate_database module, THG-beta1 and THG-beta2 by the metabolite_reac_identification module followed the build_model module and the THG was generated by the merge_metabolic_network_and_network_consistency module.

## Model Files

The model is available as ```.xml``` in the respective folders. 

## Brief Protocol Description

The different steps in the protocol can be found in different folders and can be executed independently


1. metabolite_reac_identification: Enrich gene, metabolite and reaction annotation of a reference model
	- metabolite_reac_identification.py: 
		- Identifies metabolites by name and molecular formula (generate_met_annotation)
		- Identifies reactions by unique combination of substrates and products (execute_jaccard)

2. generate_database: generates a metabolic network based using current available information from a large number of molecular databases:
	- generate_database.py:
		- Mass balance metabolic reactions (mass_balance)
		- Constritruction of SGPRs and GPRs (getGPR)
		- Identifies the cellular location of the metabolic reactions (getLocation)

3. build model: curate and expands a metabolic network model
	- build_model.py:
		- Mass balance metabolic reactions (mass_balance)
		- Constritruction of SGPRs and GPRs (getGPR)
		- Identifies the cellular location of the metabolic reactions (getLocation)

4. merge metabolic network and network consistency: merge two metabolic network while ensuring the consistency of the new model in a interative fashion
	- merge_metabolic_networks.py:
		- Mass balance metabolic reactions (mass_balance)
		- Constritruction of SGPRs and GPRs (getGPR)
		- Identifies the cellular location of the metabolic reactions (getLocation)

		- MEMOTE function that checks is a GEM is stoichiometricaly consistent (test_stoichiometric_consistency)

5. memote_and_task_analysis: performs a MEMOTE analysis to assess the quality of the metabolic model and evaluates if the the model can perform certain cellular functions (tasks)
	- see README.md in memote_and_task_analysis folder

6. compare_models: genereates a report comparing two GEMs:
	- compare_models.py

7. generate_figures: combines information from GEMs SBML files and the reports generated in "compare_models" to generate figures
	- create_figures.py

## Installation
### getGPR and getLocation

First, install the repository:

```bash
pip install .
```

After that, you need to create a BioCyc account. This works if you are in an institution that has BioCyc licenses, usually requiring physical presence.

Once installed and with a BioCyc account, the following script will fetch different ec numbers in a list:

```python
from gpr.auth_gpr import getGPR, setup_biocyc_session

ec_numbers = ["1.1.1.1", "1.1.1.204"]
# this will make authenticated queries to BioCyc
session = setup_biocyc_session(YOUR_MAIL, YOUR_PASSWORD)
# list of tuples (urls, gene, gene names, gpr, SGPR)
gprs = [getGPR(ec, session) for ec in ec_numbers]
```

### Session from environment variables

Email and password arguments can be specified outside of the script.

```bash
# this has to be the email that was used to create the account
export BIOCYC_EMAIL="YOUR EMAIL"
export BIOCYC_PASSWORD="YOUR STRONG PASSWORD"
```

And then, the script can be run as before:

```python
from gpr.auth_gpr import getGPR, setup_biocyc_session

ec_numbers = ["1.1.1.1", "1.1.1.204"]
# now without entering the email in password
#                             👇
session = setup_biocyc_session()
# list of tuples (urls, gene, gene names, gpr, SGPR)
gprs = [getGPR(ec, session) for ec in ec_numbers]
```
